apps/api/README.md, before:

<!-- PROJECT LOGO -->
<div align="center">
  <a href="https://cal.com/docs/enterprise-features/api#api-server-specifications">
    <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8019099/133430653-24422d2a-3c8d-4052-9ad6-0580597151ee.png" alt="Logo">
  </a>
  
  <a href="https://cal.com/docs/enterprise-features/api#api-server-specifications">Read the API docs</a>
</div>

# Commercial Cal.com Public API 

Welcome to the Public API ("/apps/api") of the Cal.com.

This is the public REST api for cal.com.
It exposes CRUD Endpoints of all our most important resources.
And it makes it easy for anyone to integrate with Cal.com at the application programming level.

## Stack

- NextJS
- TypeScript
- Prisma

## Development

### Setup

1. Clone the main repo (NOT THIS ONE)

   ```sh
   git clone --recurse-submodules -j8 https://github.com/calcom/cal.com.git
   ```

1. Go to the project folder

   ```sh
   cd cal.com
   ```

1. Copy `apps/api/.env.example` to `apps/api/.env`

   ```sh
   cp apps/api/.env.example apps/api/.env
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

1. Install packages with yarn

   ```sh
   yarn
   ```

1. Start developing

   ```sh
   yarn workspace @calcom/api dev
   ```

1. Open [http://localhost:3002](http://localhost:3002) with your browser to see the result.

## API Authentication (API Keys)

The API requires a valid apiKey query param to be passed:
You can generate them at <https://app.cal.com/settings/security>

For example:

```sh
GET https://api.cal.com/v1/users?apiKey={INSERT_YOUR_CAL.COM_API_KEY_HERE}
```

API Keys optionally may have expiry dates, if they are expired they won't work. If you create an apiKey without a userId relation, it won't work either for now as it relies on it to establish the current authenticated user.

In the future we might add support for header Bearer Auth if we need to or if our customers require it.

## Middlewares

We don't use the new NextJS 12 Beta Middlewares, mainly because they run on the edge, and are not able to call prisma from api endpoints. We use instead a very nifty library called next-api-middleware that let's us use a similar approach building our own middlewares and applying them as we see fit.

- withMiddleware() requires some default middlewares (verifyApiKey, etc...)

## Next.config.js

### Redirects

Since this is an API only project, we don't want to have to type /api/ in all the routes, and so redirect all traffic to api, so a call to `api.cal.com/v1` will resolve to `api.cal.com/api/v1`

Likewise, v1 is added as param query called version to final /api call so we don't duplicate endpoints in the future for versioning if needed.

### Transpiling locally shared monorepo modules

We're calling several packages from monorepo, this need to be transpiled before building since are not available as regular npm packages. That's what withTM does.

```js
  "@calcom/app-store",
  "@calcom/prisma",
  "@calcom/lib",
  "@calcom/features",
```

## API Endpoint Validation

We validate that only the supported methods are accepted at each endpoint, so in

- **/endpoint**: you can only [GET] (all) and [POST] (create new)
- **/endpoint/id**: you can read create and edit [GET, PATCH, DELETE]

### Zod Validations

The API uses `zod` library like our main web repo. It validates that either GET query parameters or POST body content's are valid and up to our spec. It gives errors when parsing result's with schemas and failing validation.

We use it in several ways, but mainly, we first import the auto-generated schema from @calcom/prisma for each model, which lives in `lib/validations/`

We have some shared validations which several resources require, like baseApiParams which parses apiKey in all requests, or querIdAsString or TransformParseInt which deal with the id's coming from req.query.

- **[*]BaseBodyParams** that omits any values from the model that are too sensitive or we don't want to pick when creating a new resource like id, userId, etc.. (those are gotten from context or elswhere)

- **[*]Public** that also omits any values that we don't want to expose when returning the model as a response, which we parse against before returning all resources.

- **[*]BodyParams** which merges both `[*]BaseBodyParams.merge([*]RequiredParams);`

### Next Validations

[Next-Validations Docs](https://next-validations.productsway.com/)
[Next-Validations Repo](https://github.com/jellydn/next-validations)
We also use this useful helper library that let us wrap our endpoints in a validate HOC that checks the req against our validation schema built out with zod for either query and / or body's requests.

## Testing with Jest + node-mocks-http

We aim to provide a fully tested API for our peace of mind, this is accomplished by using jest + node-mocks-http

## Endpoints matrix

| resource              | get [id] | get all | create | edit | delete |
| --------------------- | -------- | ------- | ------ | ---- | ------ |
| attendees             | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| availabilities        | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| booking-references    | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| event-references      | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| destination-calendars | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| custom-inputs         | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| event-types           | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| memberships           | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| payments              | ✅       | ✅      | ❌     | ❌   | ❌     |
| schedules             | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| selected-calendars    | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| teams                 | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| users                 | ✅       | 👤[1]   | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |

## Models from database that are not exposed

mostly because they're deemed too sensitive can be revisited if needed. Also they are expected to be used via cal's webapp.

- [ ] Api Keys
- [ ] Credentials
- [ ] Webhooks
- [ ] ResetPasswordRequest
- [ ] VerificationToken
- [ ] ReminderMail

## Documentation (OpenAPI)

You will see that each endpoint has a comment at the top with the annotation `@swagger` with the documentation of the endpoint, **please update it if you change the code!** This is what auto-generates the OpenAPI spec by collecting the YAML in each endpoint and parsing it in /docs alongside the json-schema (auto-generated from prisma package, not added to code but manually for now, need to fix later)

### @calcom/apps/swagger

The documentation of the API lives inside the code, and it's auto-generated, the only endpoints that return without a valid apiKey are the homepage, with a JSON message redirecting you to the docs. and the /docs endpoint, which returns the OpenAPI 3.0 JSON Spec. Which SwaggerUi then consumes and generates the docs on.

## Deployment

`scripts/vercel-deploy.sh`
The API is deployed to vercel.com, it uses a similar deployment script to website or webapp, and requires transpilation of several shared packages that are part of our turborepo ["app-store", "prisma", "lib", "ee"]
in order to build and deploy properly.

## Envirorment variables

### Required

DATABASE_URL=DATABASE_URL="postgresql://postgres:@localhost:5450/calendso"

## Optional

API*KEY_PREFIX=cal*# This can be changed per envirorment so cal*test* for staging for example.

> If you're self-hosting under our commercial license, you can use any prefix you want for api keys. either leave the default cal\_ (not providing any envirorment variable) or modify it

**Ensure that while testing swagger, API project should be run in production mode**
We make sure of this by not using next in dev, but next build && next start, if you want hot module reloading and such when developing, please use yarn run next directly on apps/api.

See <https://github.com/vercel/next.js/blob/canary/packages/next/server/dev/hot-reloader.ts#L79>. Here in dev mode OPTIONS method is hardcoded to return only GET and OPTIONS as allowed method. Running in Production mode would cause this file to be not used. This is hot-reloading logic only.
To remove this limitation, we need to ensure that on local endpoints are requested by swagger at /api/v1 and not /v1

## Hosted api through cal.com

> _❗ WARNING: This is still experimental and not fully implemented yet❗_

Go to console.cal.com
Add a deployment or go to an existing one.
Activate API or Admin addon
Provide your `DATABASE_URL`
Now you can call api.cal.com?key=CALCOM_LICENSE_KEY, which will connect to your own databaseUrl.

## How to deploy

We recommend deploying API in vercel.

There's some settings that you'll need to setup.

Under Vercel > Your API Project > Settings

In General > Build & Development Settings
BUILD COMMAND: `yarn turbo run build --scope=@calcom/api --include-dependencies --no-deps`
OUTPUT DIRECTORY: `apps/api/.next`

In Git > Ignored Build Step

Add this command: `./scripts/vercel-deploy.sh`

See `scripts/vercel-deploy.sh` for more info on how the deployment is done.

> _❗ IMORTANT: If you're forking the API repo you will need to update the URLs in both the main repo [`.gitmodules`](https://github.com/calcom/cal.com/blob/main/.gitmodules#L7) and this repo [`./scripts/vercel-deploy.sh`](https://github.com/calcom/api/blob/main/scripts/vercel-deploy.sh#L3) ❗_

## Environment variables

Lastly API requires an env var for `DATABASE_URL` and `CALCOM_LICENSE_KEY`

Commit message:

Updated Cal.com text and links with cases consideration and updated logo of mygpt in email templates

apps/api/README.md, after:

<!-- PROJECT LOGO -->
<div align="center">
  <a href="https://mygpt.fi/docs/enterprise-features/api#api-server-specifications">
    <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8019099/133430653-24422d2a-3c8d-4052-9ad6-0580597151ee.png" alt="Logo">
  </a>
  
  <a href="https://mygpt.fi/docs/enterprise-features/api#api-server-specifications">Read the API docs</a>
</div>

# Commercial MyGPT.fi Public API

Welcome to the Public API ("/apps/api") of the MyGPT.fi.

This is the public REST api for mygpt.fi.
It exposes CRUD Endpoints of all our most important resources.
And it makes it easy for anyone to integrate with MyGPT.fi at the application programming level.

## Stack

- NextJS
- TypeScript
- Prisma

## Development

### Setup

1. Clone the main repo (NOT THIS ONE)

   ```sh
   git clone --recurse-submodules -j8 https://github.com/calcom/mygpt.fi.git
   ```

1. Go to the project folder

   ```sh
   cd mygpt.fi
   ```

1. Copy `apps/api/.env.example` to `apps/api/.env`

   ```sh
   cp apps/api/.env.example apps/api/.env
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

1. Install packages with yarn

   ```sh
   yarn
   ```

1. Start developing

   ```sh
   yarn workspace @calcom/api dev
   ```

1. Open [http://localhost:3002](http://localhost:3002) with your browser to see the result.

## API Authentication (API Keys)

The API requires a valid apiKey query param to be passed:
You can generate them at <https://mygpt.fi/settings/security>

For example:

```sh
GET https://api.mygpt.fi/v1/users?apiKey={INSERT_YOUR_CAL.COM_API_KEY_HERE}
```

API Keys optionally may have expiry dates, if they are expired they won't work. If you create an apiKey without a userId relation, it won't work either for now as it relies on it to establish the current authenticated user.

In the future we might add support for header Bearer Auth if we need to or if our customers require it.

## Middlewares

We don't use the new NextJS 12 Beta Middlewares, mainly because they run on the edge, and are not able to call prisma from api endpoints. We use instead a very nifty library called next-api-middleware that let's us use a similar approach building our own middlewares and applying them as we see fit.

- withMiddleware() requires some default middlewares (verifyApiKey, etc...)

## Next.config.js

### Redirects

Since this is an API only project, we don't want to have to type /api/ in all the routes, and so redirect all traffic to api, so a call to `api.mygpt.fi/v1` will resolve to `api.mygpt.fi/api/v1`

Likewise, v1 is added as param query called version to final /api call so we don't duplicate endpoints in the future for versioning if needed.

### Transpiling locally shared monorepo modules

We're calling several packages from monorepo, this need to be transpiled before building since are not available as regular npm packages. That's what withTM does.

```js
  "@calcom/app-store",
  "@calcom/prisma",
  "@calcom/lib",
  "@calcom/features",
```

## API Endpoint Validation

We validate that only the supported methods are accepted at each endpoint, so in

- **/endpoint**: you can only [GET] (all) and [POST] (create new)
- **/endpoint/id**: you can read create and edit [GET, PATCH, DELETE]

### Zod Validations

The API uses `zod` library like our main web repo. It validates that either GET query parameters or POST body content's are valid and up to our spec. It gives errors when parsing result's with schemas and failing validation.

We use it in several ways, but mainly, we first import the auto-generated schema from @calcom/prisma for each model, which lives in `lib/validations/`

We have some shared validations which several resources require, like baseApiParams which parses apiKey in all requests, or querIdAsString or TransformParseInt which deal with the id's coming from req.query.

- **[*]BaseBodyParams** that omits any values from the model that are too sensitive or we don't want to pick when creating a new resource like id, userId, etc.. (those are gotten from context or elswhere)

- **[*]Public** that also omits any values that we don't want to expose when returning the model as a response, which we parse against before returning all resources.

- **[*]BodyParams** which merges both `[*]BaseBodyParams.merge([*]RequiredParams);`

### Next Validations

[Next-Validations Docs](https://next-validations.productsway.com/)
[Next-Validations Repo](https://github.com/jellydn/next-validations)
We also use this useful helper library that let us wrap our endpoints in a validate HOC that checks the req against our validation schema built out with zod for either query and / or body's requests.

## Testing with Jest + node-mocks-http

We aim to provide a fully tested API for our peace of mind, this is accomplished by using jest + node-mocks-http

## Endpoints matrix

| resource              | get [id] | get all | create | edit | delete |
| --------------------- | -------- | ------- | ------ | ---- | ------ |
| attendees             | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| availabilities        | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| booking-references    | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| event-references      | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| destination-calendars | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| custom-inputs         | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| event-types           | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| memberships           | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| payments              | ✅       | ✅      | ❌     | ❌   | ❌     |
| schedules             | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| selected-calendars    | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| teams                 | ✅       | ✅      | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |
| users                 | ✅       | 👤[1]   | ✅     | ✅   | ✅     |

## Models from database that are not exposed

mostly because they're deemed too sensitive can be revisited if needed. Also they are expected to be used via cal's webapp.

- [ ] Api Keys
- [ ] Credentials
- [ ] Webhooks
- [ ] ResetPasswordRequest
- [ ] VerificationToken
- [ ] ReminderMail

## Documentation (OpenAPI)

You will see that each endpoint has a comment at the top with the annotation `@swagger` with the documentation of the endpoint, **please update it if you change the code!** This is what auto-generates the OpenAPI spec by collecting the YAML in each endpoint and parsing it in /docs alongside the json-schema (auto-generated from prisma package, not added to code but manually for now, need to fix later)

### @calcom/apps/swagger

The documentation of the API lives inside the code, and it's auto-generated, the only endpoints that return without a valid apiKey are the homepage, with a JSON message redirecting you to the docs. and the /docs endpoint, which returns the OpenAPI 3.0 JSON Spec. Which SwaggerUi then consumes and generates the docs on.

## Deployment

`scripts/vercel-deploy.sh`
The API is deployed to vercel.com, it uses a similar deployment script to website or webapp, and requires transpilation of several shared packages that are part of our turborepo ["app-store", "prisma", "lib", "ee"]
in order to build and deploy properly.

## Envirorment variables

### Required

DATABASE_URL=DATABASE_URL="postgresql://postgres:@localhost:5450/calendso"

## Optional

API*KEY_PREFIX=cal*# This can be changed per envirorment so cal*test* for staging for example.

> If you're self-hosting under our commercial license, you can use any prefix you want for api keys. either leave the default cal\_ (not providing any envirorment variable) or modify it

**Ensure that while testing swagger, API project should be run in production mode**
We make sure of this by not using next in dev, but next build && next start, if you want hot module reloading and such when developing, please use yarn run next directly on apps/api.

See <https://github.com/vercel/next.js/blob/canary/packages/next/server/dev/hot-reloader.ts#L79>. Here in dev mode OPTIONS method is hardcoded to return only GET and OPTIONS as allowed method. Running in Production mode would cause this file to be not used. This is hot-reloading logic only.
To remove this limitation, we need to ensure that on local endpoints are requested by swagger at /api/v1 and not /v1

## Hosted api through mygpt.fi

> _❗ WARNING: This is still experimental and not fully implemented yet❗_

Go to console.mygpt.fi
Add a deployment or go to an existing one.
Activate API or Admin addon
Provide your `DATABASE_URL`
Now you can call api.mygpt.fi?key=CALCOM_LICENSE_KEY, which will connect to your own databaseUrl.

## How to deploy

We recommend deploying API in vercel.

There's some settings that you'll need to setup.

Under Vercel > Your API Project > Settings

In General > Build & Development Settings
BUILD COMMAND: `yarn turbo run build --scope=@calcom/api --include-dependencies --no-deps`
OUTPUT DIRECTORY: `apps/api/.next`

In Git > Ignored Build Step

Add this command: `./scripts/vercel-deploy.sh`

See `scripts/vercel-deploy.sh` for more info on how the deployment is done.

> _❗ IMORTANT: If you're forking the API repo you will need to update the URLs in both the main repo [`.gitmodules`](https://github.com/calcom/mygpt.fi/blob/main/.gitmodules#L7) and this repo [`./scripts/vercel-deploy.sh`](https://github.com/calcom/api/blob/main/scripts/vercel-deploy.sh#L3) ❗_

## Environment variables

Lastly API requires an env var for `DATABASE_URL` and `CALCOM_LICENSE_KEY`
